Hello everyone and welcome back.
Let's talk about frame rates frame rate is simply the number of images every second that will be shown.
And often the more images that are shown every second or frames per second for smoother the animation
will look.
Now this may not be the style you're going for you may want it to be a bit more jerky.
That's absolutely fine.
Let's just have a look at a few frame rate comparison so we can have a handle on what's going on.
So here is a bouncing ball at 10 frames per second.
It's just looping around.
It's just short of a second.
The animation itself now with twice the amount of frames 20 frames per second you get a much smoother
image much of bouncy a ball and it does look better.
However there's twice the amount of work involved there are 20 frames in that rather than 10 in the
other one.
Now getting the frame rate right from the very beginning or not right but spect correctly for whatever
you're working on is incredibly important.
You cannot just nearly Willy change the amount of frames per second and expect it to work.
So if we go ahead and for instance take the 10 frames per second animation and just double it to 20
frames per second as you can see it looks completely different in fact its going twice as fast as the
other ones.
Again if you take the 20 and run it 10 frames per second you still end up with a smooth animation because
there are more frames there.
However it now looks like its in slow motion so you can see how just changing the frame rate itself
will impact the animation and quite severely it no longer looks like a bouncing ball.
Its either in heavy gravity or sped up hour or on the moon you know it doesnt look quite how you'd expect
it to.
So in short if you want to extend take something from 10 frames to 20 frames per second you're going
to have to add extra frames in there.
In this case double the amount.
Now this might mean twice the amount of work as well.
So you've got to bear in mind the higher the resolution i.e. in this case the time resolution the frames
per second then it's going to take often more work to do.
Now of the converse if you've made yourself a 20 frames per second you need to play it back slower with
out changing the overall appearance the feel of the animation you're actually going to have to sacrifice
half of those frames.
And of course when you do that you end up with a slightly jerky image.
Now I'm just going to move on from these bouncing balls for the moment and have a look at frame rate
versus frame time frame rate is what we call the frames per second.
How many images every second you are going to be showing on the right the frame time that's actually
how long each individual frame will be displayed on the screen and I've just got some common frame rates
there.
The calculation you need to do is at the very top it's a thousand divided by the frames per second.
So just for example 10 frames per second is 100 milliseconds each one is on there for only a tenth of
that second.
If you go to 20 frames per second that would be 50 milliseconds et cetera et cetera.
And here you can see 24 frames per second 30 and 60 frames per second with 40 133 and 16 respectively
milliseconds.
So you can see that a higher refresh rate a higher f s you are going to have not only more work to do
because there'll be more frames being shown every second but the amount of work that's there is only
being displayed for 16.
And in this section we will go through a series of tips and tricks that you can do to help you if you
need to produce more frames.
So let's go over into guimpe now and play with a short animation okay now with GIMP loaded up we can
go ahead and create our first frame.
Now I'm going to create an image that's 64 by 64 and presto Okay.
So here we go here is our working Cambers that we've got now to make things a bit easier for myself
at the moment.
We can go ahead and literally start drawing our animation.
There are a couple of things that you can do to help when youre actually making an animation.
Now one of them of course is being able to see the previous frame or the frame in front.
Now if we go ahead and just create a black blob I want the pencil tool rather than the air brush.
There's our black blob that's a ball in this case let's say let's say we want to move it across well
to create a new frame.
We know we have to add a new layer now your layers themselves.
If you have them with transparency you can.
She sees through.
It does cause a few niggles later on that you have to work around.
But with the transparency turned on that is one way of being able see what the next frame is of.
Go ahead and click new click okay next frame click new click okay and in the next frame you can see
the ball is moving across the screen.
If we go ahead now and want to view the animation we can go to filter's animation and play that back
and when we play it back.
It's a relative size.
You can see one of the issues here is that it is building up.
We'll discuss how to sort that out later Ron.
And it's building up because of the transparency.
One of the ways around that is to go to the particular layer and literally fill it in with the white
and then you can not see through the layers.
Now this might not be possible on some later animations that were going to do it.
It just won't look right.
If you do that however this is a good way for the moment of working that out.
Now that I have that like that's when we go to animation and play back we see that each individual frame
is shown with the other one being fully overwritten and not being seen through.
Again this is at 10 frames per second.
At one time speed if we go ahead and change that's a two it's not really it 20 frames per second it's
got the illusion of being at 20 frames per second it will just playing back 10 frames per second at
twice the speed as close that down for the moment and have a look at some other ways of seeing through.
Now if the pastie of your layer is a little lower let's just say you knock it down to maybe 50 or 60
first double click to type in 50 in this case and do that to all of your layers.
Did I mean to go to rename there.
So that's 50 this to 50 Kepler fats.
And this here to 50 as well or thereabouts.
There you go.
Said.
Five hundred.
You can now see through but because you're layering on top.
The older one is the most faded out.
So that's a good way of seeing the history as well as where the previous frames were.
Of course it would be prudent to turn that back up again mere opacity so that you have solid images
if you need to concentrate on the frame you're currently working on.
Incidentally if you do want to focus on a single frame you can hold down the SHIFT key as you're clicking
on any of these eyes and it will so low that layer.
So we're only seeing this second layer from the bottom.
If I shift click the next one up it literally switches to that one so that's also a good way of hopping
between your frames or your layers that you've created soloing them from everything else.
Finally of course we've already done this one once with an export but what we'll have a look at here
is how you can override the export setting so at the moment this doesn't really have any settings for
it.
We'll have a look at the syntax of things you can type on your layers in a bit.
But until then when we go ahead and export and we can say this as a test animation just to test out
what's going on.
So we got four frames animates animation.
There we go.
Now there are a couple of ways you can select by file type and go down to the bottom the stropped down
here and find the gif and animated gif or Jif and then dot gif on the end will also do the same.
So you don't have to search for every time.
I'm going to make sure I'm going to save this into the appropriate location.
I'm going to export that.
And it gives us some options.
Of course we've already had a look at this once but now we have a look at the extra options further
down.
So I need a tick as an animation because that's what we're doing.
The delay between the frames where unspecified Now we don't have any controls on the end of our Lares
you will understand more about that in the following lecture.
But these are unspecified frames so they're all going to have a hundred milliseconds to lay which is
10 frames per second.
So if you have four frames the whole animation is only going to last point for a second.
Now each frame disposed where unspecified this is useful if your alferd out.
So where we saw earlier where we had the ball on our four layers and moving across.
That's a great way of animating but it does mean you've got a huge load of wasted space where really
all you care about there is that black dot moving across what you can do here is either combine them
which is not what we want to do but replace them.
Each frame is individual.
And I'll show you that in a couple of seconds.
You can force this delay between frames for all frames so you can override anything that's been set
elsewhere and you can also use the disposal settings as well so let's have a look at this disposal settings
at the moment we.
Let's just close this down.
We have these layers here.
Now if I was to go in and to each one amblin Use the same Fuzzy's select tool and just remove that background.
Now this background itself is the background layer the one named background doesn't have an outflow
at the moment so let's go ahead and add one so I'm going to right click on the layer and add our 4 channel.
You can also do that through the layers menu.
And now I can go ahead and select the area that's entirely white and just make sure that the ball itself
opes.
That's what you get for not having the hard layer active so you can see it.
But there we go.
We can now see that the layers all of them have our fire and we can turn the capacity up at this point
as well.
Now since you can't go over 100 you can just type in any number larger than a hundred and or set to
that.
We can now see all of our frames if we go ahead and just export as.
And again I'm going to have to go to the appropriate location.
Go to repo's in my case and in it animated sprites and call this test animation.
And make sure it's a dot gif.
In this case and won't we do that we get this option.
Now if I wanted this to last an entire second I'd have to do as an animation and not a hundred seconds
or a hundred milliseconds.
We'd have to do a calculation we'd have to do a thousand divided by four frames and that would give
us a whole second.
So that'll be 250 milliseconds.
So in this case it or go-between knees every 250 milliseconds.
And I'm going to use that delay for all of these at the moment frame despose aware unspecified.
Now if I don't care it's just going to use what is being predefined in in this case they will layer
on top of one another.
So let's see what that looks like.
And that's also the same as combining in this particular case.
So if we go ahead and export and go and have a look at that here we go here's my test animation.
If we go ahead and open that you can see it building up.
However with our flare president we can replace.
So if we go ahead here when we export this time test animation again I'm just going to overwrite it
someday and replace this time I'm going to one frame per layer.
So that's a replace.
And then when we export and have a look at the same animation again this time it's each one individually.
So you can still have that Alpha layer present which is incredibly useful when you're building up an
animation from multiple layers rather than the simplistic one at the moment which is just a black dot
on a background.
And of course that leads us nicely onto a challenge.
So in this challenge I'd like you to create a bouncing ball so the ball is going to start up the top
hit the ground or the bottom of your image and bounce back up again.
Your animation must be 10 frames long.
And I want it to last for two seconds.
Export it as an animated gif and share it with us.
Go ahead.
Pause a video and give that ago.
Everyone welcome back.
Let's go ahead now and angry 8 a bouncing ball.
That's 10 frames long and lasts for two seconds.
Okay so back overing guimpe.
We have got four frames already but I am just going to go ahead and delete those.
And I'm going to delete the background as fast.
Create a new layer.
And I'm going to have it transparent 64 bice's for fine.
We'll have a look in more detail about that later from different layer sizes.
But for now let's go ahead.
I'm going to create a slightly smaller ball in this case I'm going to grab my brush size and turn it
down to 15.
So just got smaller ball more opportunity to move it.
And this is relatively straightforward.
I'm going to go ahead create a black bull and new layer transparency black ball.
New layer et cetera et cetera.
And as the ball is falling I want it to increase its distance between which is absolutely fine.
There we go it's falling rapidly.
Then it hits the bottom which is about vapour.
New frame.
And we just finished this off it's going to bounce up quickly and then obviously slow down as it gets
towards the top of its bants.
I'm going to undo that last one.
Slightly overlapping Is this a great thing about using the Alpher I can see how it's going.
How many layers have we got we've got layer and then layer 1.
So that's really less zeros so one more layer after this which is perfect.
That's exactly what I wanted.
And about that.
Perfect.
Okay so we've got our 10 frames.
So it's 10 frames long the animation.
I can just check this here if I go to animation.
OK.
Of mice.
Nope.
Here we go.
If I just go down to filter's animation and play back we can go ahead and play that and see what it
looks like.
Okay.
That is looking good.
Now in this case I don't need to fill in the frames white or anything along those lines.
I'm quite happy with that's the progression it's going to make.
And in the export process itself I'm going to call this what it is and export it.
Now here comes the bit.
We need to pay attention to the delay between frames.
I need it to be two hundred milliseconds.
Two hundred times ten is two thousand two thousand milliseconds is ah whole two seconds.
So that's fine grained despose aware unspecified I want it's replace.
So I don't get the overlapping effect of them and hit her head and export that.
And then of course immediately check it.
Here we go bouncing ball and there ago 0 1 2 Perfect's takes a second to fall and a second to bounce
up.
Now this is a particularly great animation.
There's things we can do to improve it.
But as a principle and a proof of concept this is a great starting point.
How did you guys get on.
Did you do something slightly different.
Did you make it curve down and bounce up in a slightly different way.
And please do remember to show your work over in the discussions.
Okay I'm back really quick here just to show you I've tidied up my folder structure as well as I faded
out there just so I've got the project files that I've been working on and not examples that I've been
setting up for you guys to see as well.
So I've just tidied that up and I suggest you keep your area tidy too.
Now I will say at this point that I've not named my layers in here.
That's fine for this example.
Otherwise you just say bouncing ball repeatedly rather than lay up.
That's absolutely fine in this instance as we start to get more complicated layers and multi layered
animations.
Well then you can start thinking about your naming more appropriately so in this case we might name
the black ball.
But I will leave it as it is for the moment.
Let's go ahead here.
Make sure we've saved our work of course if you haven't done that can cause some issues and this is
obviously the guimpe file itself says the X C.F. with all the information in the air we go just to finalize
there.
And again I see you all in their next lecture.